---
title: "nix-shell vs. nix shell"
date: 2024-01-11T22:55:00-08:00
tags: ["nix"]
---

Exploring Nix is intimidating for a newcomer.
It's a language, an ecosystem, a platform, and a philosophy,
but it's also kind of fractured between classic Nix and Nix flakes.
Here's my short account of using `nix-shell` and `nix shell` to create a development shell to build this blog.

<!--more-->

## Introduction

I [recently]{{ relref "20231230-nixos-init.md" }} decided to try out NixOS in an attempt to find a more robust way to manage my Linux development environment.
Specifically, I want to have my development virtual machine (VM) be as reproducible as possible (I know, that's probably an unending rabbit hole),
and I want to keep it lean.
NixOS will help me to declare and manage my VM's configuration, and
Nix will enable me to install and remove the dependencies I need for a project,
For example, Firefox, Neovim, Git, and Hugo are the core software I use to when writing a blog post.
Firefox and Neovim are used outside of this blog, but I don't need Hugo laying around when I'm not working on my blog.
Hopefully, you get my motivation.

_But what about using Docker containers?_
I know all about it, and I have managed development environments with containers many times before.
It generally works fine, but containers can be big and I can't (or don't want to) put my whole VM in a container.

It's the beginning of 2024 and, even though they are still experimental, [Nix flakes](https://nixos.wiki/index.php?title=Flakes) seems like _the way_ to get started with Nix.
After a couple of days of reading about flakes and tinkering with them, I have a working NixOS configuration for my VM.
I'm not ready to share my configuration yet, mainly because it's for my work VM and I use [`security.pki.certificates`](https://search.nixos.org/options?channel=23.11&show=security.pki.certificates) to add my company's intranet certificate authority (CA) to the system's trusted CAs and that's not something that should be shared publicly (obviously).

With a working flake-based NixOS configuration, let's try to build this blog...

## Hugo is Simple Enough, Right?

As stated before,
this blog is built with [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/).
After cloning its repository,
the workflow I want is
to enter the repository's local directory,
install Hugo,
write a post,
commit and push it to GitLab,
and then uninstall Hugo.
Let's use both classic Nix and Nix flakes to achieve this.

### Classic Nix

If I was to be using classic Nix, that is, not using Nix flakes, then I think I'd use `nix-shell -p hugo`.
I'm still kicking the tires on this whole Nix thing, so I'll try that just to see what happens.

```bash
blog ➤ nix-shell -p hugo

_output omitted for brevity_

[nix-shell:~/dev/personal/blog]$ hugo version
hugo v0.120.3+extended linux/amd64 BuildDate=unknown VendorInfo=nixpkgs

[nix-shell:~/dev/personal/blog]$ exit

blog ➤ nix-store --gc
```

Okay!
I was "dropped" into a new development shell that had `hugo` installed.
Then,
I queried the version of Hugo installed,
exited the shell,
and ran the Nix garbage collector to remove the unused Hugo installation.
That was... really easy.

Nix installed version `v0.120.3+extended` for my platform.
This makes sense:
I pinned `nixpkgs` to use `nixos-23.11` in my `flake.nix` (see listing below),
and I can see on [NixOS Search that this is the version of Hugo in the 23.11 channel](https://search.nixos.org/packages?channel=23.11).

```nix
# ~/nixos-config/flake.nix

inputs = {
  # There are many ways to reference flake inputs (see link above). The most
  # widely used is `github:owner/name/ref`, which represents the GitHub
  # repository URL + branch/commit-id/tag. GitLab repositories can be used
  # simiarly.

  # Official NixOS package source
  nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-23.11";

  # ...
};
```

Now, let's do it the "flakes way".

### Nix Flakes

There's a [section in the "NixOS & Flakes Book"](https://nixos-and-flakes.thiscute.world/nixos-with-flakes/introduction-to-flakes#nix-flakes-and-classic-nix) that discusses what commands I should be using to accomplish the same thing above with flakes.
From that section, I should be using `nix develop`, `nix shell`, and `nix run` instead of `nix-shell`.
That seems _excessive_.
I mean, `nix-shell -p hugo` was a one liner that did everything I wanted, but okay, I'm here to learn.

Sidebar: I had to google "nix-shell vs nix shell" to try to understand why Nix flakes replaces this one command with three.
This post on the NixOS Discourse was helpful:
<https://discourse.nixos.org/t/nix-shell-nix-shell-and-nix-develop/25964>

It looks like `nix shell` is an easy substitute:

```bash
blog ➤ nix shell nixpkgs#hugo

*output omitted for brevity*

blog ➤ hugo version
hugo v0.121.1+extended linux/amd64 BuildDate=unknown VendorInfo=nixpkgs

blog ➤ exit

blog ➤ nix-store --gc
```

This is the same workflow as before.
Let's quickly note the differences.
First,
while I like that the new shell uses my zsh setup,
it's not obvious that I was actually "dropped" into a new shell.
The command line isn't prefixed with `nix-shell` like it was after running `nix-shell -p hugo`,
which was a nice indicator.
Second, and more interestingly, a different version of Hugo was installed.

Before diving in further, let's talk about what I the `nix-shell` command that I typed, er, copied.
That's right, I copied and pasted the `nix-shell nixpkgs#` part from an example in the book and tacked on `hugo` to the end of it
(because that just seemed like the correct thing to do).
I should understand what I just did before continuing.

*Spends 30 minutes here and there over several days reading various Nix-related materials.*
*Now understand why I don't blog that much. :)*

Quoting the Nix Reference Manual,
"a flake is a filesystem tree (typically fetched from a Git repository or a tarball) that contains a file named flake.nix in the root directory."[^1]
Now, `nixpkgs`, as used above, is clearly not a filesystem tree.
It's actually a symbolic identifier called a _flake registry_.
The next logical question is how can I know the URL mapped to the `nixpkgs` flake registry.
Well, there's the `nix registry` command, so let's use that to list the registries I have:

```shell
blog ➤ nix registry list                                                                                                                                                          git:master*

*output omitted for brevity*

global flake:nixpkgs github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixpkgs-unstable
```

This tells me
if I go to the `nixpkgs-unstable` branch of the `NixOS/nixpkgs` Git repository hosted on GitHub
then I will find the Hugo package with Hugo's version set to 0.121.1+extended...

*Ladies and gentlemen, we got him:*
<https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/nixpkgs-unstable/pkgs/by-name/hu/hugo/package.nix#L13>.
Note that in the flake the `buildGoModule`'s attribute set has `extended` in its `tags` list.

## Good for Now

I didn't get around to `nix-develop` and `nix-run` like I thought I was going to.
I want to eventually have the flake for my blog to install the same version of Hugo that I use on CI to build and deploy my blog.
Conveniently, the version I use is the version that is defined in the `nixpkgs` flake.

I've barely scratch the surface of NixOS and Nix flakes, but I'm interested in learning more.
We'll see what happens.

_Fin_.

<!-- Footnotes -->
[^1]: https://nixos.org/manual/nix/unstable/command-ref/new-cli/nix3-flake.html#description

